📖 Add implementation notes to the in-place update proposal (#12880)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20240807-in-place-updates-implementation-notes.md

# In-place updates in Cluster API - Implementations notes

This document is an collection of notes about implementation details for the in-place update proposal.

As soon as the implementation will be completed, some of the notes in this document will be moved back 
into the proposal or moved to the user facing documentation about this feature.

## Notes about in-place update implementation for machine deployments

- In place is always considered as potentially disruptive
  - in place must respect maxUnavailable

>     - if maxUnavailable is zero, a new machine must be created, then as soon as there is “buffer” for in-place, in-place update is done

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - if maxUnavailable is zero, a new machine must be created first, then as soon as there is a “buffer” for in-place, the in-place update can proceed.
```

  - when in-place is possible, the system should try to in-place update as many machines as possible.
    - maxSurge is not fully used (it is used only for scale up by one if maxUnavailable =0)

- No in-place updates are performed when using rollout strategy on delete.

- The implementation respects the existing set of responsibilities of each controller
  - MD controller manages MS
    - MD controller enforces maxUnavailable, maxSurge
    - MD controller decides when to scale up newMS, when to scale down oldMS
    - When there is a decision to scale down, MD controller should check if this can be done via in-place vs delete/recreate. If in-place is possible:
      - Old MS will be informed to move machines to the newMS, and newMS will be informed it will receive machines from oldMS.
  - MS controller manages a subset of Machines
    - When scaling down the old MS, if required to move, MS controller is responsible for moving a Machine to newMS

>     - MS controller, when reconciling the newMS, will take over the moved machine and start the actual in-place upgrade operation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - When reconciling the new MachineSet, the MS controller takes ownership of the moved machine and begins the actual in-place upgrade.
```

    RX-->>-MD Controller: Yes!
    MD Controller->>MS1 (OldMS): Apply annotation ".../move-machines-to-machineset": "MS2"
    MD Controller->>MS2 (NewMS): Apply annotation ".../receive-machines-from-machinesets": "MS1"
```

Workflow #2: MS controller, when reconciling oldMS, move machines to the newMS

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant MS Controller as MS Controller<br/>when reconciling<br/>MS1 (OldMS)
    participant MS1 (OldMS)
    participant MS2 (NewMS)
    participant M1 as M1<br/>controlled by<br/>MS1 (OldMS),<br/>selected to be moved to MS2
    MS Controller-->>MS1 (OldMS): Are you scaling down?
    MS1 (OldMS)-->>MS Controller: Yes!
    MS Controller-->>MS1 (OldMS): Do you have the ".../move-machines-to-machineset" annotation?
    MS1 (OldMS)-->>MS Controller: Yes, I'm instructed to move machines to MS2!
    MS Controller-->>MS2 (NewMS): Do you have ".../receive-machines-from-machinesets" annotation?
    MS2 (NewMS)-->>MS Controller: Yes, I'm instructed to receive machines MS1!
    MS Controller->>M1: Move M1 to MS2 (NewMS)<br/>Apply annotation ".../pending-acknowledge-move": ""<br/>Apply annotation ".../update-in-progress": ""
```

> Workflow #3: MD controller recongnizes the newMS being moved to the newMS and it scales up newMS to acknowledge the operation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workflow #3: MD controller recognizes the newMS being moved to the newMS and it scales up newMS to acknowledge the operation 
```
